move_os_into_ram/README.md, before:

# Move XL OS ROM into RAM

I copied the code from [AtariArchives](https://www.atariarchives.org/mapping/appendix12.php#:~:text=Move%20XL%20OS%20ROM%20into%20RAM) and made it compatible with MADS.

Follow main [README](../README.md) to compile and run it

When you do it, OS (`$c000`-`$ffff` except `$d000`-`d7fff`) will be in RAM and therefore you can write there.

## Examples

Pause app and open debugger (Press `F8` in Altirra)

### Change screen background's color

1. Change `STA COLPM0,X` to `LDA COLPM0,X` on the address `$c16f` - use emulator's assembler or just change the 1st byte from `$9d` to `$bd`
2. Continue (`F8` again)
3. Write a color into HW `COLPF2` (`$d018`)

The color will be set as a background color in GR0 screen and VBI doesn't replace the color from the shadow `COLOR2` (`$2c6`).

<https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12584138/231277830-2902c410-0fb9-4211-85a8-5cc731e6c2a1.mp4>

### Modify character set

1. Continue (`F8` again)
2. Modify a character in character set (`$e000`)

The change appears on screen.

<https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12584138/231278644-5a5f5323-2f7a-4d3b-bd59-4e57ad9e8741.mp4>

Commit message:

Added howto copy OS ROM to RAM
Added how to use HW color with disabled VBI

move_os_into_ram/README.md, after:

# Move XL OS ROM into RAM

I copied the code from [AtariArchives](https://www.atariarchives.org/mapping/appendix12.php#:~:text=Move%20XL%20OS%20ROM%20into%20RAM) and made it compatible with MADS.

Follow main [README](../README.md) to compile and run it

When you do it, OS (`$c000`-`$ffff` except `$d000`-`d7fff`) will be in RAM and therefore you can write there.

## Examples

Pause app and open debugger (Press `F8` in Altirra)

### Change screen background's color

1. Change `STA COLPM0,X` to `LDA COLPM0,X` on the address `$c16f` - use emulator's assembler or just change the 1st byte from `$9d` to `$bd`
    - 💡 You can simulate the same behavior even with OS in ROM. Just set `0` into `NMIEN` (`$d40e`) - it disables VBI completely and therefore shadow colors are ignored
2. Continue (`F8` again)
3. Write a color into HW `COLPF2` (`$d018`)

The color will be set as a background color in GR0 screen and VBI doesn't replace the color from the shadow `COLOR2` (`$2c6`).

<https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12584138/231277830-2902c410-0fb9-4211-85a8-5cc731e6c2a1.mp4>

### Modify character set

1. Continue (`F8` again)
2. Modify a character in character set (`$e000`)

The change appears on screen.

<https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/12584138/231278644-5a5f5323-2f7a-4d3b-bd59-4e57ad9e8741.mp4>
